GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Candidates
try to win over New Hampshire,
as Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders
prepare for a town
hall forum tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
A rare case of the Zika virus,
possibly being
sexually transmitted in Texas,
raises new
questions and concerns.
GWEN IFILL: And a violent
response to refugees
in Sweden, as the right wing
rallies against
an influx of thousands.
FREDRIK HAGBERG, Nordic Youth:
It's chaos
in Sweden. It's getting worse by
the minute.
It's like the gates of hell is
open.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
political
wars are escalating, as the New
Hampshire
primary draws another day
closer. Democrats
traded charges today over who's
more progressive,
and two Republicans quit the
field, as their
rivals wrangled over the outcome
in Iowa.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It's, honestly, really, really
dishonest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump was
one of two
Republicans who kept their fire
trained on
Ted Cruz for something that
happened on caucus
night. In a string of tweets
today, Trump
said: "Ted Cruz didn't win Iowa.
He stole
it."
He charged Cruz supporters with
spreading
rumors as the caucuses got under
way that
another rival, Ben Carson, was
dropping out.
Trump called it fraud and
insisted -- quote
-- "Either a new election should
take place,
or the Cruz results nullified."
A Cruz spokesman denied the
campaign officially
sanctioned the rumors, but said
the Texas
senator has apologized to
Carson.
He spoke himself today in
Washington.
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: Senator
Cruz told me that he wasn't
aware of that
when I talked to him, and that
he didn't agree
with that kind of thing. And we
will wait
and see what he does to
demonstrate that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The results from
Iowa also
sealed the fate of two more
Republicans.
SEN. RAND PAUL (R-KY),
Presidential Candidate:
Today, I will suspend my
campaign for the
presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rand Paul, who
finished fifth,
said he's dropping out.
SEN. RAND PAUL: I'm proud of our
principled
campaign, and the thousands of
young people
who have been energized by our
message of
limited constitutional
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Rick
Santorum, who finished
11th, is following him out the
door. Meanwhile,
Marco Rubio, a surprisingly
strong third in
Iowa, focused on Democrats.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
We cannot afford to wake up in
November to
the news that we have a
president named Bernie
Sanders or a president named
Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Rubio also
faced criticism
again from Chris Christie, who
charged the
Florida senator won't give
straight answers
to New Hampshire voters.
On the Democratic side, the talk
was all about
liberal credentials.
It began with this yesterday
from Bernie Sanders:
QUESTION: Do you think Hillary
Clinton is
a progressive?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Some days, yes, except when she
announces
that she is a proud moderate,
and then I guess
she's not a progressive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton shot back
today at
a rally in Derry, New Hampshire.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I think it was a good day for
progressives
when I helped to get eight
million kids health
care under the Children's Health
Insurance
Program.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And I
think it was
a good day for progressives when
I joined
with colleagues in the Senate to
stop George
W. Bush from privatizing Social
Security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton and
Sanders will appear
separately tonight at a CNN town
hall.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, oil prices
reversed course again and jumped
8 percent,
and stocks mostly followed suit.
The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 183
points to close
at 16336. The Nasdaq lost 12
points and the
S&P 500 added nine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Syrian peace
talks in Geneva
came to a halt today, just two
days after
being convened. The opposition
had demanded
humanitarian moves take place
first, while
the Assad regime focused on the
makeup of
the opposition side. Given the
impasse, the
special U.N. envoy said it's
time to take
a break and resume February 25.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: I have
therefore taken this
decision to bring a temporary
pause, temporary
pause. This is not the end, and
it is not
the failure of the talks. Why?
They came and
they stayed, not only, but both
sides insisted
on the fact that they are
interested in having
the political process started.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The announcement
came as Syrian
government ground forces, backed
by Russian
airstrikes, broke a long-running
siege by
the opposition of two villages
near Aleppo,
Syria's largest city.
GWEN IFILL: The near-daily
Palestinian attacks
on Israelis escalated today.
Police say three
Palestinians armed with guns,
knives and bombs
killed one border security
officer and wounded
another in Jerusalem. Police
then shot and
killed the attackers.
Authorities say the
Palestinians were planning a
larger-scale
assault on civilians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Afghanistan,
Taliban gunmen
have killed a 10-year-old boy
who had fought
the militants. Wasil Ahmad
became a local
hero last year for joining a
militia when
his father was killed. Police
say he was shot
twice in the head Monday in
Uruzgan province
as he left home near the
provincial capital.
GWEN IFILL: North Korea's
neighbors warned
the communist state today to
abandon plans
for launching a satellite this
month. South
Korea said the North will pay --
quote -- "a
severe price" if it goes ahead.
And Japan's military deployed
missile interceptors
in Tokyo, as Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe urged
North Korea to show restraint.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, President
Obama paid his first visit to an
American
mosque. He spoke at the Islamic
Society of
Baltimore and argued that the
U.S. has no
place for bigotry, and that
Muslims are too
often blamed -- quote -- "for
the violent
acts of the very few."
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
When any religious group is
targeted, we all
have a responsibility to speak
up, and we
have to reject a politics that
seeks to manipulate
prejudice or bias and targets
people because
of religion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
visit followed
Islamist attacks in Paris and
San Bernardino,
California, and a growing number
of criticisms
of American Muslims.
GWEN IFILL: And there's word
that two more
NFL football stars, both
quarterbacks, had
the brain disease CTE. Ken
Stabler and the
Oakland Raiders won the Super
Bowl in 1977.
He died last year. And Boston
University researchers
now say he had widespread brain
damage. And
Earl Morrall's family says he,
too, had advanced
CTE at his death in 2014. He won
a Super Bowl
with the Baltimore Colts in
1971.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
addressing the root cause of the
Zika virus
outbreak; the rise of Sweden's
radical right,
a backlash against refugees; a
struggling
Yahoo slashes jobs; and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: Anxiety over the
Zika virus continues
to build. In Florida, where
there are at least
nine cases of the illness,
Governor Rick Scott
declared a health emergency in
four counties
today, including Miami-Dade.
Zika has been
found in more than 25 countries
in the Americas
and Caribbean.
Nearly all cases come from
mosquitoes. And
the CDC issued a new travel
advisory today
for Jamaica. At the same time,
public health
officials say they want to learn
more about
a reported case of sexual
transmission of
Zika in Texas.
We look at some of the central
questions with
Dr. Michael Osterholm, director
of the Center
for Infectious Disease Research
and Policy
at the University of Minnesota.
Thank you for joining us.
How worried should we be with
these new reports
every day, these new
classifications every
day of this new virus?
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM, Director,
University
of Minnesota Center for
Infectious Disease
Research: Well, first of all,
the fact that
there's been a case now
documented of sexual
transmissions doesn't surprise
us. That's
already happened before.
The question is, how often it
will occur?
And at this point, we don't have
any evidence
it's a frequent occurrence, but
clearly for
those who travel from the United
States to
one of these affected countries
and a male
coming back having sex with his
female partner
who either may be pregnant or
could become
pregnant is a concern. And in
that sense,
that's what we need to be most
worried about.
GWEN IFILL: How significant is a
WHO call
or declaration of emergency in
this case?
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Well,
first of all,
to really understand this
concept of emergency,
what it really does is, it just
helps prioritize
the kind of resources and the
importance to
the world that this is.
It shouldn't mean that people
should panic
or that people should somehow do
something
very, very different. What we
need to do -- and
we know how to do it, actually
-- is what
we do, what we call source
reduction for the
mosquitoes in the Americas,
meaning let's
get rid of the breeding sites.
This particular mosquito is
really what I
call the Norway rat of
mosquitoes. It lives
with humans. It loves to life in
the human
home. It breeds in water bodies
that occur,
for example, in a pop cap or a
piece of discarded
tinfoil, non-biodegradable
material, tires.
If we clean up the solid waste,
the garbage,
really, around our communities
in those counties
and countries where this is
occurring, we
can have a great impact on the
transmission
of this virus by this mosquito.
GWEN IFILL: So, focusing on the
mosquitoes
is what they call vector
control. How much
should attention be spent on
that and how
much on developing a vaccine?
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Well,
first of all,
there is no one answer. It's all
of the answers.
You want to do as much as can
with the source
reduction, meaning get rid of
where they breed.
This type of mosquito is very
different than,
for example, the one that causes
malaria,
in most instances, which might
be in large
bodes of water, in rice fields
and so forth.
This is really breeding in very,
very small
bodies of water, as I said, such
as might
be in a discarded wrapper,
inside a tire.
The second thing is, you want to
make sure
that you can kill the adults who
do that,
but that by itself is not
enough. That's often
a great photo opportunity to
show someone
out with a spraying machine, but
that is truly
not it.
You want to do all of that, plus
you want
to work on vaccines. You want to
look at,
can you use genetically modified
mosquitoes?
So, all of these are things that
should be
brought to bear. And I think the
point that
has been missed here in this
country is that
this mosquito has already been
causing very
serious death, disease and
death, in South
America, Central America,
already, with dengue
and another virus called
chikungunya.
And so by taking care of the
Zika virus, we
actually end up taking care of
all these other
ones.
GWEN IFILL: So this is similar,
rather than
different, from something like
the dengue
virus, which last we were
talking about that
was in 2013, I think?
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Right,
exactly.
And, as you know, on this very
program, there
has been discussion about how
many thousands
of people have died, how many
people had serious
illness. In a sense, if you take
care of dealing
with any one of these viruses,
you take care
of all of them.
And so while -- what has
happened really is
because of the issue with
microcephaly, and
this very, very horrible image
of these children
with these very small heads, the
world has
now paid attention. This has now
become a
photo opportunity kind of
crisis.
GWEN IFILL: So, now that the
world is paying...
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: And that
wasn't the
case with dengue.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
So, now that the world is paying
attention,
what are the questions that
should be getting
asked which are not yet?
DR. MICHAEL OSTERHOLM: Well,
first of all,
we have to find out just how bad
this disease
really is, meaning in terms of
number of cases.
There's no doubt that
microcephaly, or these
small heads, in newborns, as --
and small
brains, as well as the
Guillain-Barre syndrome,
this type of paralysis disease,
is occurring
because of Zika. What we have to
understand
is in fact how frequently it's
occurring,
where it's occurring.
Right now, much of Brazil has
not been impacted.
So, when we come up with these
country-wide
numbers, it doesn't mean much.
What we have
to do is look at where it's
going to unfold.
Just as an example, the
chikungunya virus,
which came into St. Martin in
December of
2013, is still unfolding across
the Americas.
Expect the same thing with the
Zika virus.
For the next two years, we are
just going
to just see this continue wave
after wave
to go through these communities.
GWEN IFILL: Dr. Michael
Osterholm of the University
of Minnesota, thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sweden is
struggling to accommodate
165,000 people who've applied
for asylum there
amid the refugee crisis. Now, in
a reversal
of its open door policy, the
government says
as many as half could face
deportation.
A growing right-wing reaction to
the migrant
influx has fueled tensions.
From Stockholm, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Sweden fashions
itself as
the world's humanitarian
conscience and safe
harbor for more refugees per
capita than any
other European nation, but it
has been shaken
by a series of incidents that
have ruptured
that image.
MAGNUS RANSTORP, Sweden National
Defense College:
I would say that Sweden's social
structures
are under severe stress.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Magnus Ranstorp
is an expert
on extremism in Scandinavia.
MAGNUS RANSTORP: It's a cocktail
of various
ingredients which makes society
extremely
polarized. And the government is
having a
really difficult time dealing
with this.
TINA MORAD, Refugee Advocate: As
a refugee
here, I would say it's pretty
hostile.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Tina Morad is a
Kurdish political
scientist who fled from Northern
Iraq as a
child, and now advocates on
behalf of fellow
refugees.
TINA MORAD: We have noticed a
lot of activities
for the past week at least where
you have
Nazis and racists crossing the
street and
demonstrating against the
refugees arriving
in Sweden.
MALCOLM BRABANT: These are
right-wing vigilantes,
including football hooligans,
apparently attacking
immigrants. This precinct is
where young Moroccans
hang out. Many have acquired a
reputation
as petty criminals and
troublemakers.
The attack happened a few days
after a murder
at a young asylum seeker's
hostel in Western
Sweden. A 22-year-old worker,
Alexandra Mezher,
originally from Lebanon, was
stabbed to death,
allegedly by a young Somali,
after trying
to intervene in a fight. The
murder intensified
pressure on Prime Minister
Stefan Loven, whose
popularity has slumped despite
U-turns over
his open door migration policy.
STEFAN LOVEN, Swedish Prime
Minister (through
translator): I believe quite a
few people
here in Sweden now feel a great
worry there
will be more similar cases, as
Sweden accepts
so many unaccompanied minors.
Many of those
who come here to Sweden have had
traumatic
experiences, and there are no
simple answers.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Fredrik Hagberg
is a leading
member of a far-right activist
group called
Nordic Youth. He admits to
feeling sympathetic
towards the vigilantes.
FREDRIK HAGBERG, Nordic Youth:
It's chaos
in Sweden. It's getting worse by
the minute.
It's like the gates of hell is
open. More
and more immigrants than we can
take care
of is coming every day. The
violence is getting
more and more. Hatred against
Swedes, people
are getting bigger and bigger.
The women and
children are getting harassed
every day.
The police can't be everywhere
at once. The
people need to do something by
themselves
if something is going to change.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It sounds like
you might
be advocating violence?
FREDRIK HAGBERG: No, not at all,
not at all.
Our movement has always stood
against violence,
political violence, but I
believe in self-defense.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And this is one
of his organization's
videos.
Are you Nazis?
FREDRIK HAGBERG: No, not at all.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How can you
prove that?
FREDRIK HAGBERG: It's proved by
my actions,
or you just walk around. Look at
our Web site.
We have a program there,
manifest.
MAGNUS RANSTORP: I think the
greatest threat
Sweden is facing is that we have
an equal
amount of extremism. We have a
lot of right-wing
extremism and, of course,
left-wing extremism.
There's a sort of reciprocal
radicalization
going on. They are feeding and
fueling each
other.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is another
video which
has shed a light on the
atmosphere inside
some of the homes that
accommodate some 3,500
unaccompanied minors taken in by
Sweden. It
shows the aftermath of an attack
on one young
boy. This is just one of what
the police say
have been 5,000 incidents at
asylum centers
that they have been called to
attend.
Anna Nellberg Dennis, deputy
chair of Sweden's
police union, says there have
been recent
problems west of Stockholm in
Vasteras.
ANNA NELLBERG DENNIS, Deputy
Chair, Swedish
Police Union: We were down on
our knees, work-wise
and workload-wise, already long
before this
migration crisis and the terror
-- increased
terrorist threats.
Now, I have about three cases in
the area
of Vastmanland where the biggest
city is Vasteras,
where police officers have been
forced to
push the alarm button because
they are surrounded
by angry immigrants that are
fighting each
other. The nice, secure and safe
country that
we once had is not really that
nice anymore.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The area around
Stockholm's
central station is a magnet for
the Moroccans
and other asylum seekers.
Several hundred
young North Africans are facing
imminent deportation
after Sweden struck a deal with
the government
in Morocco.
According to Europe's Criminal
Intelligence
Agency, at least 10,000
unaccompanied child
refugees have disappeared since
arriving in
the E.U. Many are feared to be
in the hands
of traffickers, or other
predators, according
to terrorism expert Magnus
Ranstorp.
MAGNUS RANSTORP: There is some
recruitment
by Islamic extremists at train
stations.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Today, Sweden's
Interior
Minister Anders Ygeman was
trying to project
an image of calm and control.
ANDERS YGEMAN, Swedish Interior
Minister:
I think we have been bad
prepared for this
situation. Our social system is
not made to
meet the demands from this
group. And we also
have a problem with returning
them to Morocco
if they don't have the right to
be in Sweden.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So how do you
think you're
doing?
ANDERS YGEMAN: In the overall
picture, we're
doing quite well.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But that's not
what the police
union are saying. They say that
this is no
longer the nice society it used
to be.
ANDERS YGEMAN: Well, I think
even the police
union should look forward and
not backwards,
but if we want to compare the
figures and
stats backwards, we could say
that we haven't
had this many policemen in 35
years.
MALCOLM BRABANT: They say that
you need an
extra 4,000, and you're not
going to give
them enough.
ANDERS YGEMAN: We have never had
this much
policemen. We have never had
this much money
to fund the police as we have
now. And we
have a lower crime rate.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the wake of
these disturbances,
the Swedish government is to
launch a task
force to crack down on
vigilantes who might
be thinking about taking the law
into their
own hands.
And to soften the blow of
deporting the young
North Africans, the government
is promising
to set up a special center in
Morocco to house
them in safety and security.
Tina Morad is disturbed by the
sudden change
in Swedish policies.
TINA MORAD: We have built up our
reputation
internationally of being this
humanitarian
role model. To change it that
drastically,
I don't believe that the
government has thought
through it properly, and I don't
believe that
they have any expectations of
how this might
affect Sweden in the near
future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Iraqi civil
servant Adel
Ali Qatani has decided to return
to Baghdad
because of new rules making it
more difficult
for refugees to bring over their
families.
ADEL ALI QATANI, Refugee
(through translator):
I see no solution. I can't wait
for three
years, because, at the end of
the day, I have
a problem about reuniting with
my son. In
three years, he will be an
adult. The laws
complicate matters.
Although I'm very grateful for
all the help
I have been given, I feel very
frustrated
and insecure because of all the
uncertainty
the government is going through,
all these
different changes. It's better
to return to
my family and endure the
hardship with them,
rather than leaving them alone
there.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The migration
debate is dominating
the political landscape, and the
latest polls
show rises for the main
center-right opposition
party, and in the lead are the
anti-immigrant
Sweden Democrats. Their
integration spokesman
is Markus Wiechel.
MARKUS WIECHEL, Sweden
Democrats: Well, society
is pretty much falling apart.
The government
is actually taking money from
the foreign
aid budgets to fund refugees
coming to Sweden.
And I'm not sure I'm going to
call them refugees,
actually, because they have
crossed seven
or eight more safe countries on
their way
to Sweden. They're economic
migrants. And
then it's not defendable to take
foreign aid
money to spend on the refugees.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Swedish
government is
hoping there will soon be a thaw
in widespread
European resistance towards
sharing what it
sees as its migrant burden. But,
if anything,
the climate towards refugees is
growing colder.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Stockholm.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
ethics of
creating three-parent babies;
when data and
money decides who gets medical
care and who
doesn't; and broad influence, a
look at how
women are changing the way
America works.
Yahoo
But, first: the tech giant Yahoo
in serious
trouble.
For months, and years, by some
accounts, the
company has struggled to
successfully define
a strategy to satisfy investors,
consumers
and the markets. Yesterday,
Yahoo CEO Marissa
Mayer said the company would
consider offers
for buying its core assets and
announced that
15 percent of the work force
would be laid
off.
Douglas MacMillan of The Wall
Street Journal
joins me now.
Welcome to the program.
So, how much trouble is Yahoo.
in?
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN, The Wall
Street Journal:
It looks like we might be
finally entering
kind of the final chapter of
what is really
one of the most iconic companies
in Silicon
Valley and in the Internet.
Yahoo began as kind of one of
the kind of
tentpoles of the Internet, the
place where
millions of people would go on
kind of find,
you know, news and sports and
information
on the Web. But, as the world
has shifted
to kind of an Internet that's
focused around
search and around mobile phones
and around
social networks, Yahoo has
really struggled
to kind of find an identity and
find, you
know, a business model in this
kind of new
era of the Internet.
And, particularly, the CEO the
past three-and-a-half
years, Marissa Mayer, has
struggled to kind
of reinvent Yahoo for kind of
this new era.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is a
company that
has, what, a billion people a
month going
to its Web site, using e-mail
and other services.
How does that square with all
these problems?
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN: Yes, they
have a billion
people collectively visiting
their Web properties,
but, you know, not many of them
are regularly
checking in with Yahoo on their
mobile phones
on a consistent basis.
And that, as we have seen with
Google and
with Facebook and with other
Internet companies
that have successfully kind of
made the jump
to the mobile phone era, is
becoming kind
of the basis of a successful,
you know, business
plan in 2016.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned the
CEO, Marissa
Mayer. We quoted her, what she
said, a minute
ago. How much of had is being
blamed on her?
We know some of the investors
are calling
for her to be removed, but how
much of it
is her, and how much of it is
just this is
a sector that it's very
difficult to survive,
as you just described, in this
climate?
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN: Yes,
particularly I think
there's something to be said for
how difficult
a task it is to turn around an
Internet company,
a technology company that is in
decline, that
is in freefall.
It's really almost never been
done in this
industry. So, perhaps, you know,
Marissa Mayer
inherited or, you know, took on
an impossible
task. But, on the other hand,
when she did
join the company three years
ago, there was
a lot of excitement, there was a
lot of enthusiasm
that she brought to the company,
and people
wanted to work at Yahoo for the
first time
in over a decade.
So I think what we're seeing
right now, as
we're potentially neither the
end of kind
of her tenure and the end of
Yahoo as an independent
company, is there's just a lot
of disappointment
in what could have been, and,
you know, could
she have, you know, potentially
turned around
this company?
It's unclear, you know, what she
could have
done differently.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She's still
saying that it's
going to turn around.
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN: So it's
interesting what
she says and kind of what the
board is saying
right now.
The announcement yesterday that
Yahoo's pursuing
strategic alternatives seems to
indicate that
they are seriously considering
putting this
company up for sale. And,
indeed, there are
bankers circling this company,
and potential
acquirers, who would like to buy
Yahoo, circling
this company.
But, you know, whether it's just
for optics,
whether she's just putting on a
show, or wherever,
you know, Marissa really
believes she can
still turn this company around,
she has put
together a go-forward plan that
has reduced
some of the expenses. She cut --
she has planned
to cut 15 percent of the work
force. She's
planned to close a few different
individual
small business units, close a
few remote offices.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN: But what
she's essentially
doing amounts to kind of
cleaning out the
attic, when what we're really
talking about
is a sale of the whole house.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Douglas MacMillan
of The Wall
Street Journal, thanks very
much.
DOUGLAS MACMILLAN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Now to questions
surrounding a
significant advance in
reproductive technology
with DNA and embryos.
The change on the horizon was
pioneered and
approved in England and it is
now being considered
for use in the U.S. Proponents
believe it
may eliminate dangerous disease
in children,
but others have raised ethical
concerns.
Today, the National Academy of
Sciences recommended
that clinical trials go forward
in the U.S.
William Brangham has our look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This new
technology is called
mitochondrial replacement
technique, or MRT
for shot.
Mitochondria are tiny structures
that exist
in nearly all the cells in our
bodies, and
have their own unique DNA. The
problem is,
a very small number of women
have defective
mitochondria, and if they have
children, those
kids inherit their mom's
mitochondria and
can suffer terrible, sometimes
fatal, problems,
including brain damage and heart
failure.
This new technology would, in
essence, replace
that original mitochondria in
either the mother's
egg or in the parents' embryo
with healthy
mitochondria from a third
person. A child
born this way would then be
carrying the DNA
of three different people.
Earlier today, patient advocate
Laurie Strongin
told us why the advance was so
important for
a small group of parents.
LAURIE STRONGIN, Patient
Advocate: One of
the things that we have found is
that parents'
desire to have genetically
related offspring
is a widely held desire. It's
not universal,
but it's widely held.
And the potential to use MRT to
have offspring
who are genetically related to
both parents
is something that families who
carry mtDNA
disease really want. And not
everyone is going
to pursue it, but for the family
for whom
having children who are -- who
have a nuclear
genetic connection to them, this
is something
that will just be one of
numerous options
available to them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Joining me now
to discuss
the technology and its
implications are Johns
Hopkins bioethics Professor
Jeffrey Kahn,
who chairs the panel at the
National Academy
of Medicine that recommended
moving forward
with the technology, and Marcy
Darnovsky,
who writes widely on these
issues and is the
executive director of the Center
for Genetics
in Society.
So, Jeffrey Kahn, I would like
to start with
you.
I wonder if you could just tell
us a little
bit more about this technology.
To my ear,
this sounds like what we know of
as some sort
of modified version of in vitro
fertilization.
Can you tell us a little bit
more? What is
this technology?
JEFFREY KAHN, Johns Hopkins
University: Yes.
It is, in fact, a modified
version of in vitro
fertilization, as you noted.
However, it's
picking up the nuclear DNA, the
DNA that we
think of as creating the traits
that make
us who we are, and picking that
up and putting
it into a healthy environment of
mitochondria.
As you noted in the intro, there
are women
who suffer from mutations in
addition those
mitochondrial DNA that will
cause really terrible
diseases in their offspring. So,
this is a
way to avoid that and preserve
the genetic
relationship. The difference, or
the challenges,
this has never before been done
in a human.
And so the FDA, which is charged
with regulating
license applications in new
areas like this,
asked the National Academy of
Medicine to
hold the consensus committee to
evaluate the
ethics, social, and policy
issues related
to this technology.
And that's the report that was
released today.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, just so --
I know there
are some viewers who are
wondering. We're
not talking about tweaking the
DNA that affects
our hair color or our
intelligence or things
like that.
JEFFREY KAHN: No, that's right.
And so the mitochondria actually
are quite
important. Otherwise, there
wouldn't be this
need, because people who have
defective mitochondria
have terrible disease issues.
So, mitochondria
create energy for every cell in
our body.
And they also have some other
implications
at the cellular development
level.
And so, no, it isn't actually a
way to change
the things we think of as making
us who we
are, eye color, hair color. You
mentioned
intelligence, athletic ability,
all the kinds
of things we might think of in
the so-called
designer baby problems. It
wouldn't do that.
It's really picking up a healthy
population
of mitochondria and replacing
that for those
that are diseased, and a way
forward which
we think we have crafted which
allows a responsible,
ethically acceptable way
forward, but with
great precaution and numerous
restrictions.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I'm just
curious. We mentioned
this is a relatively small
number of people
who would use this. How many
people are we
talking about?
JEFFREY KAHN: In the hundreds of
people, so
not -- across the entire
country. And part
of that is because it's a very
homogeneous
disease.
It's really hard to detect and
diagnose, and
only a small number of people
have a severe
enough version that we know for
sure that
they're going to pass it on and
that the children
who are born will be affected.
That said,
they very desperately want to
have a way to
have children who are related to
them.
The alternative for those
individuals, otherwise,
is adoption, not having
children, or egg donation.
And that is a different thing
for those individuals.
And it's an area we thought
needed to be respected
on the part of people who wanted
it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Marcy Darnovsky,
I want to turn to you.
I know you have some concerns
about this technology.
What is it that troubles you?
MARCY DARNOVSKY, Center for
Genetics and Society:
Well, I think for people who are
in the situation
that has just been described,
they have to
make a very difficult decision
about whether
to subject their future child to
the risks
of what's really a quite
biologically extreme
procedure, whether that's worth
what their
-- their preference to have a
genetically
related child is.
All people that have this
problem, this terrible
problem, can have healthy
children, children
who are not affected by these
mitochondrial
diseases, in the ways that Jeff
just mentioned,
and some of them can actually
use an embryo
screening technology as well.
And that would
further reduce the number of
people who would
be candidates for this
procedure.
And so, for the rest of us, I
think we have
to weigh the preferences of
those -- that
small number of people for a
genetically related
child against -- which is a
benefit, but it's
a social benefit, not really a
medical benefit,
because it's not about healthy
children.
We have to weigh that against
the big deal
it is to do this for the first
time, to make
changes that would be passed
down to future
generations. And this problem of
whether we
should do it or not is a subject
right now
of huge controversy around a
different technique
called gene editing.
And on that technique, the
conclusion of a
500-person meeting that was held
in December
was that it would be
irresponsible to proceed
unless and until there was a
broad, societal
consensus that it would be OK.
But, on the other hand, the
committee, although
I appreciate very much the
cautions and the
limitations that they have
recommended, but
this committee is saying it's OK
to go forward
now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jeffrey, what
do you make
of that? Is this the slippery
slope to gene
editing or some of these more
troubling outcomes?
JEFFREY KAHN: I would say no,
and here's why.
As Marcy rightly pointed out,
there are real
concerns about crossing the germ
line, so
creating genetic modifications
that could
be inherited by future
generations. And among
the recommendations in our
report was that
the initial investigations be
limited to the
implantation of male embryos,
because the
mitochondrial DNA is only passed
from mother
to offspring.
So by limiting the offspring to
males, you
wouldn't allow that germ line
modification
to happen. There would be no
possibility of
passing those alterations to
future generations.
So, we thought we could find a
way to allow
people who very much wanted to
have genetically
related offspring to pursue a
new reproductive
technology.
And I think it's important to
say there are
many new reproductive
technologies introduced
in this country and around the
world that
do not get this level of
scrutiny. This is
the first time the Food and Drug
Administration
in our country has, from the
beginning, prior
to the initial investigation of
a new reproductive
technology, has asked for this
level of scrutiny,
and, depending on what they do
with the recommendations
from this report, implement them
in a way
that will really control the
introduction
of a new technology of this
sort.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Marcy, what do
you make
of that? Do you feel that the
conditions can
be placed on this technology to
keep it in
check that would make you
comfortable with
this?
MARCY DARNOVSKY: Well, the
condition that
I would like to see placed on
this before
we go forward would be for the
United States
to join the dozens of other
countries around
the world that have actually
written laws
saying that we're not going to
alter the nuclear
DNA that's passed down to our
children and
future generations.
I think that would make us able
to evaluate
this technology in a better way.
And the limitations
are better than nothing, but
they are temporary,
as the report notes, and I think
we're already
seeing this approval being
characterized as
a green light for going ahead,
and it's being
used as an argument for doing
the full-out
kinds of genetic engineering
that would create
the designer baby scenarios.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
this is a very
interesting discussion.
Marcy Darnovsky and Jeffrey
Kahn, thank you
both very much for being here.
JEFFREY KAHN: Thank you.
MARCY DARNOVSKY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: using big
data to assess
medical treatments and
interventions and whether
decisions for individual
patients are the
right choice for all of society.
That's not necessarily seen as
the right way
of making decisions in science
and medicine
when lives are at stake. But
some believe
it's a critical consideration.
Our science correspondent Miles
O'Brien looks
at how some thinkers in the
field are challenging
long-held assumptions.
The story was produced in
collaboration with
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is where the
line between
life and death is drawn, an
operating room
at a hospital in a remote part
of Nepal.
Dr. Shree Ram Tiwari is
performing one of
the first C-sections in this
part of the world,
hoping to save the lives of Muna
Buhl (ph)
and her unborn child. It's not
going smoothly.
DR. SHREE RAM TIWARI, Physician
(through translator):
The power cut out at such an
important time,
because the baby should keep
crying after
it's born, but it wasn't. We
needed power
for the suction machine.
MILES O'BRIEN: Bringing
C-sections to this
remote corner comes not only
with risks, but
also a hefty price tag. The
bills are paid
by Possible, the American
charity that runs
the hospital.
DR. SHREE RAM TIWARI (through
translator):
Nepal's constitution talks about
health rights,
that every person should have
access to health
care. But that is not
implemented.
MILES O'BRIEN: While mother and
child remain
the focus for Dr. Tiwari as he
copes with
the power failure, the global
health community
tries to shed light on whether
this surgery
should have happened at all.
Medical ethicist Peter Singer is
a professor
at Princeton University. He is a
leading proponent
of a philosophy called effective
altruism.
PETER SINGER, Princeton
University: Effective
altruists look for those health
care programs
worldwide that offer the
low-hanging fruit.
Where can you save lives most
cheaply?
MILES O'BRIEN: Effective
altruists like Dr.
Singer compare different
interventions, and
choose the one that provides the
most bang
for the buck. They might elect
to pay for
community health workers, rather
than operating
rooms.
But human beings are not wired
to respond
in this dispassionate,
systematic manner.
This is why commercial appeals
for charities
often look like this:
NARRATOR: Tiny, vulnerable Aisha
won't eat
tonight or tomorrow. She is
slowly dying.
PETER SINGER: We are
psychologically adapted
to respond to individuals who we
can see.
But health care is a scarce
resource. So,
data is absolutely critical. We
can't know
that we're using our resources
in the best
way possible without data.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Chris Murray
agrees. That's
why he is crunching the numbers,
in an unprecedented
way.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY, Founder
and Director,
Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation:
We have a 20,000-core
supercomputer, which
is pretty ginormous.
MILES O'BRIEN: Big data meets
modern medicine.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY: If you
could identify
all the bits of information out
there, then
you would be in the strongest
possible position
to empower people to make better
decisions.
MILES O'BRIEN: Murray is founder
and director
of the Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation,
a nonprofit that caters to other
nonprofits
seeking to place smart bets.
He's the global health
equivalent of legendary
baseball manager Billy Beane,
who first applied
big data to the Major Leagues, a
story told
in the 2011 movie "Moneyball."
ACTOR: You don't put a team
together with
a computer, Billy.
BRAD PITT, Actor: No?
ACTOR: No. Baseball isn't just
numbers.
BRAD PITT: Adapt or die.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY: The
difference is
we're not worried about winning
the World
Series. We're interested in, how
do you make
people healthier?
MILES O'BRIEN: The data shows
that, globally,
infectious diseases, the red
boxes, are on
the decline. The U.S. was
declared free of
polio back in 1979. But some
countries continue
to lag far behind.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY: Go to
Niger. Whoa.
MILES O'BRIEN: Wow.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY: Let's
see. There you
go. There's where...
MILES O'BRIEN: That's as
dramatic as it gets,
huh?
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY: We know
how to get
rid of infectious diseases,
right, whether
through public health or through
medicine.
And so this is addressable.
MILES O'BRIEN: Quantity is one
thing, but
it's harder to measure a
person's quality
of life. So, Murray created a
new metric,
the Disability-Adjusted Life
Year, or DALY.
The equation is simple, the
number of years
lost to a premature death, plus
the number
of years of good health lost to
a disease
or injury. DALYs make it
possible to measure
the impact of different
interventions and
show that some hit a lot more
home runs.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MURRAY:
Individual clinical
care is great for that patient.
You change
their lives. But you don't
change the circumstances
of their health, and if you want
to do that,
you have got to see the bigger
picture.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the U.S., the
Affordable
Care Act prohibits Medicare from
using tools
like the DALY to ration health
care. Rationing
is considered a dirty word, but
Dr. Singer
says the U.S. system is infused
with it.
PETER SINGER: We don't call it
that. We deny
it. But, I mean, I think it's a
crazy system.
MILES O'BRIEN: He offers the
story of Martin
Shkreli as a case in point. In
September,
the pharmaceutical executive
became a poster
boy for greed in U.S. medical
care when he
raised the price of an
anti-parasitic drug
from $13.50 to $750 per pill.
PETER SINGER: By denying the
existence of
rationing, we're just writing a
blank check
to whatever financial
sharpshooter comes in
and sees an opportunity to make
outrageous
profits.
MILES O'BRIEN: Outside the U.S.,
there is
less concern about applying big
data to medicine
in the form of DALYs. Mexico was
an early
adopter.
Studies showed they should focus
on things
that may not kill, but cause a
great deal
of ill health, like depression
and traffic
injuries. And, in Africa, there
has been a
dramatic decline in the DALYs
lost to malaria.
PETER SINGER: This has saved
millions of lives,
and that has been largely
data-driven.
MILES O'BRIEN: But on the front
lines, a statistic
becomes a patient, and things
are less cut
and dried.
In Guatemala, Crecencia Buch
(ph) is battling
for her life, threatened by
cervical cancer.
CRECENCIA BUCH, Cancer Sufferer
(through translator):
I was told I have cancer, and I
only have
seven months to live.
MILES O'BRIEN: That was back in
2012. An American
NGO, the Maya Health Alliance,
has since spent
almost $10,000 on radiation
therapy, buying
Crecencia few extra years with
her children,
and now her grandchildren.
This is the sort of heartwarming
image that
has most donors diving for their
wallets.
But Peter Singer and the
effective altruists
remain unmoved.
PETER SINGER: If you have data
showing that
you will save more lives through
doing something
else, then you should do the
most good you
can.
MILES O'BRIEN: The DALY bottom
line suggests
the money would have had more
impact if it
had been spent on something
else, like Pap
smears to catch cervical cancer
early.
But some say DALYs are nothing
more than a
magic bullet approach that is
destined to
fail.
DR. Peter Rohloff is founder of
the Maya Health
Alliance. He made the call to
fund Crecencia's
treatment.
DR. PETER ROHLOFF, Founder, Maya
Health Alliance:
Giving a mother four years with
her children
is precisely a conversation
about living and
not a conversation just about
not dying.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Rohloff
believes not everything
can be captured by numbers.
DR. PETER ROHLOFF: We should use
big data,
right? We should be making smart
decisions
about how we spend our money.
But the other
half of the global health
equation is the
right to health care. Dreaming
about your
life and where you want your
life to go is
a basic human right, and we need
to, I think,
include that in our algorithm,
if such a thing
were possible, right?
MILES O'BRIEN: Back in Nepal,
Shree Ram Tiwari
works to resuscitate Muna's baby
without power.
DR. SHREE RAM TIWARI (through
translator):
When there is no power, we have
a manually
operated suction device which
works by breathing
with your mouth.
MILES O'BRIEN: The baby's lungs
fill with
air, and a cry echoes through
the operating
room. The lives of both mother
and child are
saved, just as the lights come
back on.
Last week, a year-and-a-half on,
we received
this photo of Muna's baby,
Malishka (ph).
She may soon have a sibling, as
Muna is pregnant
again. There are no numbers that
can adequately
convey the value of this
hospital, in this
place, for this family.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
I recently sat down with Jay
Newton-Small.
She is a Washington
correspondent for "TIME,"
magazine and she's author of
"Broad Influence:
How Women Are Changing the Way
America Works."
Jay Newton-Small, welcome.
JAY NEWTON-SMALL, Author, "Broad
Influence:
How Women Are Changing the Way
America Works":
Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I guess there's
no confusing
what broad refers to here,
right?
(LAUGHTER)
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: No. It's
actually referring
to women. And I don't know if
you knew this,
but broad used to be a pretty
derogatory term
for women, which we're hoping to
sort of reclaim
it a little bit, but it used to
apply to our
hips, because we have broad
hips, because
we bear children.
And of course we bear children.
We should
be proud of that fact.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I
absolutely remember
when it was considered a
derogatory term.
But times are changing.
Jay Newton-Small, you do a lot
of reporting
here on how women are doing.
What's really
interesting, though, is how you
document women
have to reach a certain level, a
critical
mass, so to speak, before things
really change.
And you reported on the U.S.
Congress. Talk
about that and what you found.
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: Sure.
So, the book actually grew from
a story that
I did for "TIME" magazine about
two years
ago during the government
shutdown, where
the 20 women at that point of
the 100-member
U.S. Senate got together and
restarted the
negotiations to reopen the
government, when
none of the men would talk to
each other.
And that -- I really was
interested in that
session, because those 20 women
ended up producing
more than 75 percent of the
major legislation
that passed that session. They
really batted
well above they are weight. And
I got -- it
turns out there's this theory of
critical
mass.
So, somewhere between 20 percent
and 30 percent,
women really begin to change an
institution,
whether it's a legislature or a
corporate
board, a Navy ship or an
appellate court.
And then I started looking at
all those corners
and finding other areas where
women had reached
this sort of tipping point, and
they were
really beginning to change the
way we govern,
change the way we manage, change
the way we
command.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it about
the 20 or
30 percent? Why isn't it 50
percent?
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: So, it's
interesting. You
know, one woman really is a
token. Two or
20 percent -- or, like, sort of
less than
20 percent are considered kind
of a pair.
And that's -- there have been a
ton of studies
that show -- or at least two
studies that
I can think of that show that
pairs are actually
worse than either having one or
three, because
either the women are considered
conspiratorial
or they're considered sort of
archenemies.
And it's this strange kind of, I
don't know
what's going on with the two.
But when you start getting a
plurality of
the women, three or more,
depending on the
size of the institution, that's
when you really
begin -- women's voices are
considered less
exceptional, and it's not this
weird thing,
like, where are you coming from?
And it becomes
less -- sort of less
objectifying them, and
more sort of normal, like
brother and sister
or normal work areas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what did you
find that
women want to do differently
from men? Where
does the policy change or the
direction of
an organization change because
of women who
are making decisions?
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: It depends on
the organization.
But there's been a lot of great
research,
one that shows that women tend
to be a lot
more prepared than men. They
tend to really
want to dig in on an issue.
Women ask the
hard questions and say, where's
the accounting?
Where's the money going? How is
it being spent?
Women also tend to be more
collaborative.
They tend to look for win-win
situations,
where everybody can win,
everyone can advance
together, whereas men can be --
not all men,
but a lot of men can be sort of
zero-sum game,
I win, you lose.
So, those are two sort of very
common aspects
of...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's not as
if all women
agree on the direction things
should go.
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: No, and -- not
at all.
And, in fact, you see that in
the Senate.
For example, you had Senator
Kirsten Gillibrand
from New York and Claire
McCaskill from Missouri
disagreeing over how to do
sexual assault
in the military bill.
But that is the great joy of
having enough
women to disagree. Right? You
don't have to
all be on the same page to go
places. But
what you have to do is respect
each other.
And, so, notably, when they
disagreed, they
agreed not to recriminate each
other, not
to like sling accusations or
insults. They
just said, we disagree, but we
still appreciate
each other's perspectives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was struck that
the one area
where you said there doesn't
seem to be change
when they get to critical mass
is the private
sector. And you looked at the
financial industry.
And there was a quote from a
woman who had
been on several corporate
boards. She said:
"There's a trend. When women and
money penetrate
a sector, the money and power
leaves it."
She said: "When women finally
got into investment
banking, all the money went to
private equity.
When women got into private
equity, it went
to hedge funds."
So, why is it different?
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: I don't know
that it's the
men are -- I can't say that
they're, like,
conspiring -- conspiring to keep
women out
of it.
But what -- it is the sense
that, when you
are diversifying, when the power
structure
is no longer the people that
look exactly
like you, it moves beyond the
sort of core
group of a certain number of
people, that
that makes some people
uncomfortable. It makes
many -- certain people leave,
start different
industries, start to do
different things.
Women are chasing the money,
but, to some
degree -- like, you see this
also in medicine,
for example. When women weren't
allowed into
medicine, and then they were
finally allowed
into pediatrics, right, and all
the, like,
money left pediatrics. And then
women were
finally allowed into some kind
of surgery,
but the kinds of surgery they're
in are not
the kinds that all the money is
made.
And so it is striking. It's an
interesting
phenomenon. And I don't know
what that says
about our culture.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it raises
some interesting
questions.
Finally, Jay Newton-Small, you
say you're
hopeful about the future. Why?
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: Well, so, it
was economic
necessity that first brought
women into the
work force with Rosie the
Riveter during World
War II.
And it wasn't until 1970 that
all of the laws
banning married women from
working without
their husband's permission were
fully repealed.
And I think it will be economic
necessity
that brings women to the work
force now, fully.
And you see that. We're right on
the cusp
of it. So, by 2030, the baby
boomer generation
will fully retire and we will be
short 26
million workers.
There's only two ways to make up
that shortfall.
One, you bring in a ton of new
immigrants,
which is really hard to imagine
with this
Congress. Or, two, you bring
women up to full
employment. And that is a lot
easier -- much
more easily done. There's plenty
of qualified
women who can do it. We make up
more than
half of the college degrees
already. And so
it will be easy to -- much
easier to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's 15
years away, but
maybe things will change in the
meantime.
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: I'm betting on
it.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jay Newton-Small.
The book is "Broad Influence."
Thank you very much.
JAY NEWTON-SMALL: Thank you,
Judy.
GWEN IFILL: And a news update
before we go.
If you were hoping to get a jump
on your taxes
this year, you might have to
wait. The IRS
experienced computer failure
this afternoon,
affecting a number of tax
processing systems.
They say some services will be
down until
Thursday.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: The Zaatari
refugee camp in Jordan is a
temporary home
to tens of thousands of Syrians,
including
a group of artists who are
recreating precious
monuments destroyed by war and
the ISIS invasion,
in hopes of preserving the
memory for future
generations.
It's part of our ongoing Art
Beat series,
Syrian Voices. All that and more
is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, I will talk with
the president
of Colombia. After 50 years of
war, the country
faces a new fight with Zika.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.